<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Dedication</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
</head>
<body dir="ltr">
  <section class="dedication dedication-left" epub:type="dedication">
    <p>This book is dedicated to all the people that helped along the way. I want to say thank you to Manuel Vivo, Joe Birch, Antonio Leiva, Enrique López-Mañas, Andrei Shikov, Leland Richardson, Chuck Jazdzewski, Andrey Kulikov, and Adam Powell for reviewing parts of this book and providing very valuable feedback.</p>

<p>I also want to give special thanks to the Google Jetpack Compose team/s for the incredible work and amount of effort they have put on this ecosystem of libraries, and for embracing the book in such a positive way since day one. Jetpack Compose is already a game changer for the future of Android and Kotlin Multiplatform UI.</p>

<p>Shout-out to my mate Andrei Shikov, who wrote one of the chapters (probably the most interesting one!). Thanks Andrei for being an active part of this, your help is really appreciated.</p>

<p>I must also mention Snapp Mobile (https://snappmobile.io/), Snapp Automotive for their proactiveness sponsoring the book and designing the book cover during its earlier stages. Ana Silva is the designer behind such an incredible cover. Outstanding work, we truly love it! Big thanks to Stream (https://getstream.io/) also for their sponsorship, they helped to make this book a reality.</p>

<p>Finally, I really want to thank my wife, María Isabel, and my beloved daughter, Julia, for giving me all the strength and motivation to face such a complicated challenge during these particularly hard times. Having a family like the one I have is like having a superpower. I am so lucky to have you. I love you both.</p>
  </section>
</body>
</html>

